Greenberg’s essay, published three years later, is generally understood as a response 
to Rosenberg’s “American Action Painting”, but its focus is precise. It is an empirical, 
sustained, and unrelenting attempt to refute the claim that abstract expressionist 
painting constitutes a break with the past. Opposed also to Rosenberg’s effusive style, 
Greenberg’s writing is a close and meticulous visual analysis—analogous to the New 
Critic’s close reading of a literary work—based on the formal elements of painting, 
rather than on concepts, ideas, and psychological states. 
His argument begins with a mere passing reference to one of Greenberg’s central 
concerns, namely the necessity of “self-purification” in modern art. 
It seems to be a law of modernism—thus one that applies to almost all art that 
remains truly alive in our time—that the conventions not essential to the viability of a 
medium be discarded as soon as they are recognized…. And it is understood, I 
hope, that conventions are overhauled, not for revolutionary effect, but in order to 
maintain the irreplaceability and renew the vitality of art in the face of a society bent 
in principle on rationalizing everything. It is understood, too, that the devolution of 
tradition cannot take place except in the presence of tradition.
This brief passage, so casually tossed off, deserves close scrutiny and a bit of 
unpacking, particularly for the reader not familiar with Greenberg’s theory of modern art. 
It contains several fundamental and controversial theses having to do with justification, 
autonomy, and the search for essential and defining features of a thing. 
It was Immanuel Kant who, late in the Eighteenth Century, argued that to be modern, a 
human undertaking—in his case, philosophy—must provide its own “justification” and, in 
doing so, defend its very existence. It does this “internally” by means of its own 
resources. In the case of philosophy this means using logical, philosophical reasoning 
to show that it contributes something significant in human experience that no other 
human practice can provide. This is what gives philosophy its value and reason for 
being. Demonstrating this in philosophical terms amounts to a self-justification. It 
also establishes philosophy’s autonomy—that it is governed by its own laws and logic.
Greenberg applies Kant’s “law of modernism” to the arts, and in particular to the visual 
arts medium by medium. In this way, for example, painting is called upon to justify its 
existence “internally”, through the means and elements of painting itself. It must 
demonstrate that it offers something of value that no other medium can provide. This 
“self-justification” takes place historically through an extensive process of painters 
experimenting with and questioning the limits of the medium. When a “convention” or 
feature of painting is seen as inessential, or not necessary for a painting to be a 
painting, it is discarded. 

Take, for example, representations of objects—trees, people, fruits, tables, buildings, 
horses, etc. They can be produced not only in painting, but just as well, if not better, in 
sculpture, photography, and film. Thus, they are not essential to painting and must be 
discarded in art that aspires to be modern. 
Greenberg's controversial claim is that through this process of “purification”—shedding 
all that is not unique to painting—what remains in the modern work are its essential 
features—paint on a flat, two-dimensional surface. Painting has justified its existence 
through painterly means, demonstrated its autonomy, and become truly “modern”.
This process of the self-purification of painting continues in 1955, according to 
Greenberg, because it has not yet reached its essence.
Greenberg also points out that, contrary to Rosenberg’s assertion, recent American 
painting associated with such self-purification constitutes “no more of a break with the 
past than anything before it in modernist art has”. On the contrary, it depends on “a 
thorough assimilation of the major art of the preceding period or periods”. He cites 
numerous examples in support of this claim. In fact, the rest of the essay, impossible to 
summarize here, is a fascinating and detailed account of the formal development of 
“‘American-Type’ Painting” seen through the work and influence of artists from Picasso, 
Kandinsky, Klee, Miró, Mondrian, and Léger to Gorky, Willem de Kooning, Hofmann, 
Gottlieb, Motherwell, Pollock, Newman, Rothko, and Still.
This emergence of an avant-garde tradition in New York, which takes over the role from 
the now exhausted “School of Paris”, was made possible by a number of factors, 
according to Greenberg. They include: the presence of emigre European artists, critics, 
dealers, and collectors; major works of modern art on exhibit, many for the first time in 
America, at the Guggenheim Museum; the opportunity artists had to work on the 
Federal Art Project of the WPA; an increasingly well educated audience for art; and 
America’s relative distance from the Second World War